Tourist attractions include:

 Osaka Aquarium Kaiyukan
 Universal Studios Japan
 Umeda Sky Building
Amusement parks[edit]
Osaka Aquarium Kaiyukan – An aquarium located in Osaka Bay, containing 35,000 aquatic animals in 14 tanks, the largest of which holds 5,400 tons of water and houses a variety of sea animals including whale sharks. This tank is the world's second-largest aquarium tank, behind the Georgia Aquarium, whose largest tank holds approximately 29,000 tons of water.
Tempozan Ferris Wheel – A 112 m tall Ferris wheel located next to the aquarium in the bay area.
Tennōji Zoo
Universal Studios Japan
HEP Five – A shopping/amusement plaza in Umeda featuring a Sega Joypolis and rooftop Ferris wheel offering views of the city.
Umeda Sky Building – Twin 173 m skyscrapers bridged by a rooftop "Floating Garden" observatory presenting a 360-degree panoramic view of Osaka. Popular for photographs, the structure also houses an underground mall with restaurants styled after the early Showa period of the 1920s.
Parks[edit]
Nakanoshima Park:  About 10.6 ha. In the vicinity of the City Hall
Osaka Castle Park:  About 106 ha. Includes Osaka-jō Hall, a Japanese plum blossom (Ume) garden, a Cherry Blossom garden, and more. It is a hotspot for migrating birds in the spring and autumn.
Sumiyoshi Park
Tennōji Park:  About 28 ha. Includes Tennōji Zoo; an art museum (established by contribution from Sumitomo family in 1936); and a Japanese garden, Keitaku-en (慶沢園). Keitaku-en was constructed in 1908 by Jihei Ogawa (小川治兵衛, Hiragana: おがわ じへえ), an illustrious gardener in Japan. This was originally one of Sumitomo family's gardens until 1921.
Utsubo Park
Nagai Park: The 2007 IAAF World Championships in Athletics were held at the Nagai Stadium, located in this park.
Tsurumi-Ryokuchi Park with the Sakuya Konohana Kan was the site of the flower expo in 1990.
Umekita Gardens.
Temples, shrines, and other historical sites[edit]
 Hideyoshi's Osaka Castle, destroyed in 1868 and rebuilt in 1931.
 Shitennō-ji with Abeno Harukas in the background
 Siege of Osaka Castle in 1614
Osaka Castle
Sankō Shrine
Shitennō-ji – The oldest Buddhist temple in Japan, established in 593 AD by Prince Shōtoku
Sumiyoshi taisha One of the oldest Shinto shrines, built in 211 AD.[71]
Tamatsukuri Inari Shrine
Ōsaka Tenmangū Shrine
Osaka Peace Pagoda, built by Nipponzan Myohoji in 1963.
Imamiya Ebisu
Entertainment[edit]
Dōtonbori - Osaka's primary tourist and nightlife area
Namba and Shinsaibashi districts – Located side by side in Minami, offering shopping, restaurants, bars and nightclubs running 24/7
Higashi-Dori area – A network of shōtengai in Umeda with numerous restaurants, bars, and nightlife options
Shin-michi/Kitashinchi district – Well known for its upscale dining and hostess clubs, also offers more reasonably priced izakaya as well as bars and nightclubs that cater to tourists and foreigners
Shinsekai – Earthy eating/drinking district, built around the Tsūtenkaku Tower and famous for cheap kushikatsu
Den Den Town – An electronics/anime district analogous to Tokyo's Akihabara, Den Den Town also features maid cafes, bars, and other venues of entertainment
Sankaku Koen (Triangle Park) – A popular youth meeting spot in Amerika-mura. Eccentric fashions and local skateboarders abound
Jūsō – Popular working class bar/nightlife district
Kyobashi – A commercial area and shotengai with a diverse variety of izakaya
Zepp Osaka – A live stage venue in the Osaka Bay area that hosts many big-name musical acts and events
Doyama – Considered a hub for Osaka's LGBT community
Tobita – A red-light district
Day-Trip Locations[edit]
Kyoto - Travel there in 15 mins with the Shinkasen[72]
Hiroshima - Known as a city bombed during WWII, it's become an attractive tourist site
