Local administrationThe Mayor and the CouncilOsaka City HallMayor:Toru HashimotoVice Mayors:Akira Morishita,Takashi KashiwagiCity CouncilPresident:Toshifumi Tagaya (LDP)Members:83 councilors (7 vacant)Factions:Osaka Restoration Association (36),Liberal Democratic Party and Citizen's Club (20), Komei Party (19), Japanese Communist Party (9),Go OSAKA (1)Osaka Abe (1)Seats by districts:
Ward (no. of seats)
Abeno-ku (4),Asahi-ku (4),Chūō-ku (2),Fukushima-ku (2),Higashinari-ku (3),Higashisumiyoshi-ku (5),Higashiyodogawa-ku (6),Hirano-ku (6),Ikuno-ku (5),Jōtō-ku (5),Kita-ku (3),Konohana-ku (3),Minato-ku (3),Miyakojima-ku (3),Naniwa-ku (2),Nishi-ku (2),Nishinari-ku (5),Nishiyodogawa-ku (3),Suminoe-ku (4),Sumiyoshi-ku (6),Taishō-ku (3),Tennōji-ku (2),Tsurumi-ku (3),Yodogawa-ku (5)
WebsiteOsaka City CouncilNote: As of October 27, 2017
See also: Local Autonomy Law, Municipalities of Japan, and Politics of Osaka City
The Osaka City Council [ja] is the city's local government formed under the Local Autonomy Law. The Council has eighty-nine seats, allocated to the twenty-four wards proportional to their population and re-elected by the citizens every four years. The Council elects its President and Vice President. Toshifumi Tagaya (LDP) is the current and 104th President since May 2008. The Mayor of the city is directly elected by the citizens every four years as well, in accordance with the Local Autonomy Law. Tōru Hashimoto, former governor of Osaka Prefecture is the 19th mayor of Osaka since 2011. The mayor is supported by two Vice Mayors, currently Akira Morishita and Takashi Kashiwagi, who are appointed by him in accordance with the city bylaw.[38]

Osaka also houses several agencies of the Japanese Government. Below is a list of Governmental Offices housed in Osaka.




Japan Coast Guard, Fifth Regional Headquarters
Japan Fair Trade Commission; Kinki, Chugoku, Shikoku Office
Kinki Regional Finance Bureau
Kinki Regional Economy, Trade and Industry Bureau
Kinki Regional Transportation Bureau
Kinki Communications Bureau
Kinki Regional Development Bureau
Kinki Regional Police Bureau
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Osaka Office
Osaka Customs
Osaka District Court




Osaka Family Court
Osaka High Court
Osaka Immigration
Osaka Labour Bureau
Osaka Meteorological Observatory
Osaka Public Prosecutors Office
Osaka Regional Aerospace Bureau
Osaka Regional Law Bureau
Osaka Regional Taxation Bureau
Osaka Summary Court



In July 2012, a joint multi-party bill was submitted to the Diet that would allow for implementation of the Osaka Metropolis plan as pursued by the mayor of Osaka city, the governor of Osaka and their party. If implemented, Osaka City, neighbouring Sakai City and possibly other surrounding municipalities would dissolve and be reorganized as four special wards of Osaka prefecture – similar to former Tokyo City's successor wards within Tokyo prefecture. Special wards are municipal-level administrative units that leave some otherwise municipal administrative responsibilities and revenues to the prefectural administration.[39] In December 2018 the mayor and governor of Osaka may resign to force a referendum on the Metropolis plan to coincide with the election for those positions in the spring of 2019.[40]

In October 2018, the city of Osaka officially ended[41] its sister city relationship with San Francisco in the United States after the latter permitted a monument memorializing “comfort women” to remain on a city-owned property, circulating in the process a 10-page, 3,800-word letter in English[42] addressed to San Francisco mayor London Breed.

