Due in part to its geography and climate, the Monterey Peninsula has not only a high degree of species endemism, but also presents a unique combination of non-endemic species due to overlap of species with more northerly versus more southerly ranges. Some taxa, such as the coastal closed-cone pines (which include Monterey Pine) and the Monterey Cypress are relict stands, i.e. species that once extended more widely in the mesic climate of the late Pleistocene epoch, but then retreated to small pockets of cooler and moister conditions along the coast ranges during the hotter, drier early and middle Holocene epoch between 6000 and 2000 BC.[11]

According to the maps of the United States Geological Survey, the highest elevation of the peninsula, 250 meters (825 feet) above sea level, is on the north-south ridge that runs the length of the peninsula. The climate is a cool Mediterranean type, strongly influenced by the prevailing winds from the west, which blow over the Pacific Coast's cool ocean current from Alaska and the cold water that wells up from Monterey Bay's submarine canyon. At the National Weather Service's Climate Station in the City of Monterey at 385 feet elevation, the coldest month is January, with an average daily high of 15.5ʡC (60ʡF); the warmest month is September, with an average daily high of 22ʡC (71.5ʡF); the average daily low is 6ʡC (43ʡF) in January and 11.5ʡC (53ʡF) in September; and the average rainfall is 50 centimeters (19.7 inches) per year, with 90.3% falling during November through April.  During summer, fog drip is the primary source of moisture for plants that would otherwise not be able to persist with such low summer precipitation.  The fog drip and precipitation are heaviest along the spine and west side of the ridge because the prevailing winds and precipitation come from the west.  The weather can be much hotter when the winds blow from the east: Since 1906, there have been 11 days with a high of 37.8ʡC (100ʡF) or higher; all 11 days occurred in June, September, or October.[12]

A variety of natural habitats are found on the Monterey Peninsula: littoral zone and sand dunes; closed-cone pine forest; and Monterey Cypress. During the early 1900s, Willis Linn Jepson characterized the forests on the Monterey Peninsula as the "most important silva ever", and encouraged Samuel F. B. Morse of the Del Monte Properties Company to explore the possibilities of preserving the unique forest communities.[13] The forests of the Monterey Peninsula are now called the Del Monte Forest. The dune area is also important, as it hosts endangered species such as the vascular plants Seaside birds beak and Eastwoods Ericameria. The closed cone pine forest habitat is dominated by Monterey pine, Knobcone Pine and Bishop Pine, and contains the rare Monterey manzanita and endangered Hickman's potentilla and Yadon's piperia; rare plants inhabiting chaparral habitat in Monterey are: Hickman's onion and Sandmat manzanita. Other rare plants on the peninsula are: Hutchinson's larkspur, Tidestrom lupine; Gardner's yampah and Monterey Knotweed.

